summary
In the Dutch dietary guidelines 2015, the Health 
Council specifies the recommended intake of 
foods and beverages to prevent chronic 
diseases. These guidelines are meant for the 
general population. This includes people with 
type 2 diabetes, a condition that affects around 
one million people in the Netherlands. At the 
time, it was not separately assessed whether 
the Dutch dietary guidelines are entirely  
appropriate for people with type 2 diabetes.  
For this group, disease-specific adjustments or 
additions to the Dutch dietary guidelines may be 
required. 
At the request of the State Secretary of Health, 
Welfare and Sport, the Health Council is now 
advising on this matter. The Permanent 
Committee on Nutrition prepared the advisory 
report.
Striving for weight reduction
A large number of people with type 2 diabetes 
are overweight or obese, and weight reduction 
can have significant health benefits for these 
people. People’s energy balance is inextricably 
linked to dietary intake, which is why the 
Committee has also addressed weight reduction 
for people with type 2 diabetes in this advisory 
report. In case of overweight or obesity, the 
Committee recommends to strive for a weight 
reduction of at least 5%, and to maintain this in 
the long term. For people that aim to lose 
weight, an energy-restricted diet can be 
compiled based on the Dutch dietary guidelines. 
However, weight reduction is complex and 
usually requires addressing multiple factors, 
including lifestyle-related factors, at the same 
time. The Committee stresses that a multi- 
factorial approach is important, but does not 
discuss the broad range of options that can 
contribute to weight reduction and maintenance 
in this advisory report. 
No deviations from the  
Dutch dietary guidelines needed
Foods and beverages
The Dutch dietary guidelines 2015 contain 
several guidelines for the intake of foods and 
beverages. Of these, the Committee evaluated 
the guidelines relating to vegetables, fruit,  
whole grain foods, legumes, sugar-containing  
beverages, dairy products, coffee and salt for 
people with type 2 diabetes. This selection was 
based on existing dietary guidelines for people 
with type 2 diabetes and on the expert  
judgement of the Committee. 
The Committee evaluated the effects of these 
foods and beverages on the same outcome 
measures as used in the Dutch dietary  
guidelines: mortality and morbidity caused by 
2 42

Executive summary 


the top ten chronic diseases in the Netherlands, 
body weight, LDL cholesterol and blood  
pressure. For this advisory report it also  
examined, among other things, the effects on 
glucose metabolism. The Committee found a 
limited number of studies in people with type 2 
diabetes that addressed these outcome  
measures, and although too little research had 
been done to arrive at a conclusion in some 
cases, the outcomes were, generally speaking, 
in accordance with the Dutch dietary guidelines. 
The Committee therefore sees no reason to 
deviate from the Dutch dietary guidelines 2015 
for people with type 2 diabetes. 
Dietary patterns
The Dutch dietary guidelines make the  
overarching recommendation to eat more plant-
based foods and fewer animal-based foods, 
based on evaluations of studies on different 
dietary patterns, such as Mediterranean, DASH 
(Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) and 
vegetarian dietary patterns. Based on existing 
dietary guidelines for people with type 2 
diabetes, the Committee concludes that this 
overarching recommendation also applies to 
people with type 2 diabetes. 
A carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern was 
not evaluated for the Dutch dietary guidelines, 
but is covered in existing dietary guidelines for 
people with type 2 diabetes. The Committee  
has therefore considered whether to include 
carbohydrate restriction in the Dutch dietary 
guidelines for people with type 2 diabetes. 
The studies evaluated by the Committee 
included either severe or moderate carbo-  
hydrate restrictions, replacing carbohydrates 
with fats, proteins or both. Both the carbo- 
hydrate-restricted diets and the diets with which 
they were compared were, in general, calorie-
restricted diets. The Committee can therefore 
only make statements about the effects of 
prescribing a carbohydrate restriction in  
conjunction with energy restriction. The  
participants in the studies had type 2 diabetes 
and were overweight or obese. The studies 
show that for these people, severe carbohydrate 
restriction can contribute to weight reduction in 
the short term (3 to 6 months) and, possibly as a 
result, improve glucose metabolism compared to 
a different dietary pattern. However, the studies 
show there is no difference any more when 
comparing severe or moderate carbohydrate 
restriction for 12 months to other dietary 
patterns. Therefore, for the promotion of long-
term health, the Committee sees no reason to 
recommend severe or moderate carbohydrate 
restriction for people with type 2 diabetes. There 
are hardly any studies on the health effects of 
long-term severe or moderate carbohydrate 
restriction. People with type 2 diabetes who wish 
to reduce their energy intake are advised to do 
so under the guidance of a dietician. A dietician 
can ensure that the Dutch dietary guidelines are 
taken into account in the compilation of the diet, 
and that the diet provides sufficient quantities of 
important nutrients, including for people who 
prefer to reduce their energy intake by restricting 
their carbohydrate intake. 
3 52

Executive summary 


Integrated approach 
The Committee’s recommendations can be used 
in public information on nutrition and nutritional 
care for people with type 2 diabetes, for example 
by the Netherlands Nutrition Centre and  
dieticians. The Committee stresses that other 
lifestyle-related factors, such as physical activity, 
are also important for people with type 2 
diabetes. In treating type 2 diabetes, the Dutch 
dietary guidelines should therefore be part of a 
broader set of interventions that also focus on 
other lifestyle-related factors.
4 62

Executive summary 


01 
introduction
5 72

chapter 01 | Introduction 


This advisory report was prepared by the Permanent Committee on  
Nutrition of the Health Council of the Netherlands. In it, the Committee 
answers the question asked by the State Secretary of Health, Welfare and 
Sport as to whether the Dutch dietary guidelines published by the Health 
Council in 2015 also apply to people with cardiometabolic disorders and 
whether any disease-specific adjustments or additions are required for 
them. This request for advice is answered in parts. In this first advisory 
report, the Committee focuses specifically on people with type 2 diabetes. 
1.1 Reason for advisory report
For the general Dutch population (from 2 years of age), the Health  
Council’s Dutch dietary guidelines 2015 specify the recommended intake 
of foods and beverages to prevent chronic diseases, including  
cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes and some forms of cancer.1 
A significant part of the Dutch population already has chronic diseases, 
such as the cardiometabolic diseases type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular 
diseases. The Nutrition Committee assumes that the Dutch dietary  
guidelines 2015 are also suitable for people with cardiometabolic  
disorders, as these guidelines are largely based on studies in the general 
population and not only in healthy populations. People with cardio-  
metabolic disorders are therefore also covered in the evaluations that  
form the basis of the Dutch dietary guidelines. Several Dutch treatment 
guidelines for people with type 2 diabetes or cardiovascular disease  
therefore recommend following the Dutch dietary guidelines.2-4
At the time, it was not separately assessed whether the Dutch dietary 
guidelines are entirely appropriate for people with type 2 diabetes. More 
and more studies in people who already have type 2 diabetes or cardio-
vascular disease are now being published and there are suggestions that 
health gains can be achieved for these groups through the diet.5-7 These 
studies allow improved insight into whether the Dutch dietary guidelines 
apply to those groups and whether any disease-specific adjustments or 
additions are required. The State Secretary of Health, Welfare and Sport 
has now requested the Health Council to issue an advisory report on this 
matter. The request for advice can be found on the Council’s website. This 
first advisory report focuses specifically on people who already have type 
2 diabetes. 
This report was prepared by the Permanent Committee on Nutrition, with 
experts from nutritional, behavioural, medical and paramedical disciplines. 
A list of the Committee’s members can be found at the end of this advisory 
report. The Health Council Presidency gave stakeholders the opportunity 
to comment on drafts of the background documents and the advisory 
report. All comments received and the Committee’s responses to them 
have been published on the Committee’s website. The Health Council’s 
Standing Committee reviewed the advisory report, after which the  
6 82

chapter 01 | Introduction 


Council’s Presidency presented it to the State Secretary of Health, 
Welfare and Sport. 
1.2 Type 2 diabetes
In 2019, over 1.1 million people with diabetes were known to their GP in 
the Netherlands. Diabetes is an umbrella term for various metabolic  
disorders that lead to permanently elevated levels of blood glucose.  
The best known and most common forms of these disorders are type 2 
diabetes and type 1 diabetes. About 90% of people with diabetes have 
type 2 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes is caused by a combination of genetic 
predisposition and an unhealthy lifestyle (such as inactivity and an 
unhealthy diet), with lifestyle-related factors playing the biggest role.  
Type 2 diabetes occurs more frequently with age, but is also increasingly 
common in adolescents and young adults.8,9
In people with type 2 diabetes, the cells in liver, muscle and fat tissue are 
less sensitive to insulin (insulin resistance). Moreover, the beta cells of the 
pancreas usually produce low quantities of insulin (beta cell dysfunction). 
Insulin is a hormone that is responsible for transporting glucose (from food 
and other sources) to the cells, where it is either used as fuel or stored. 
Insulin resistance and beta-cell dysfunction cause glucose levels in the 
blood to rise (hyperglycaemia). People with type 2 diabetes can develop 
long-term complications such as cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney 
damage, foot problems and poor vision, which can have a significant 
negative impact on their quality of life and longevity.3,10 
1.3 Users of this advisory report 
This advisory report is intended as a basis for the public information on 
nutrition provided by the Netherlands Nutrition Centre and patient  
organisations for people with type 2 diabetes. Dieticians can, in  
cooperation with other healthcare professionals such as general  
practitioners, diabetes nurses and internists, provide tailored dietary 
advice to people with type 2 diabetes. These healthcare professionals  
can use this advisory report as a reference work. Finally, the Council’s 
recommendations can be integrated into broader interventions aimed at 
promoting a healthy lifestyle for people with type 2 diabetes, which are 
discussed in greater detail in Chapter 5.
7 92

chapter 01 | Introduction 


Different dietary recommendations for people with type 2 diabetes
The Health Council has written this advisory report for professionals looking to give 
nutritional information and/or nutritional care to people with type 2 diabetes.  
The primary goal of this advisory report is to promote long-term health and not to 
reduce acute signs and symptoms of type 2 diabetes. For this advisory report, the 
Council used the existing Dutch dietary guidelines as a starting point and consid-
ered whether there were indications that deviating guidelines might better serve 
people with type 2 diabetes. The Dutch dietary guidelines are intended as a basis 
for a healthy and varied dietary pattern and are based on studies on the health 
effects of different diets, foods and nutrients. The outcomes of these studies were 
translated into guidelines for foods and beverages (e.g. vegetables, fruit, sugar-
containing beverages). The findings on nutrients have been used as supporting 
evidence in making these guidelines on foods and beverages. The Dutch dietary 
guidelines therefore do not contain separate guidelines on nutrient intake, nor do 
they provide guidelines on specific diets (such as Mediterranean or DASH). Rather, 
they make the overarching recommendation, based on research into healthy diets, 
to eat more plant-based foods and fewer animal-based foods. The principles of 
these healthy eating patterns are also reflected in the food and beverage guide-
lines. 
Several other Dutch and international organisations have also drawn up dietary 
recommendations for people with type 2 diabetes4,11-16, such as the Netherlands 
Diabetes Federation (NDF).4 The NDF guideline is intended as a practical support 
guideline for healthcare professionals who wish to provide personalised nutritional 
care. The guideline presents ways to prevent diabetes and how to treat people who 
already have type 1, type 2 or gestational diabetes. The recommendations are 
aimed at limiting acute symptoms and promoting long-term health. The NDF  
guideline provides advice on conventional diets, with separate recommendations 
on nutrients, foods and dietary patterns, as well as on supplements, weight loss 
methods, lifestyle programmes and exceptional situations. The NDF guideline also 
provides practical advice and addresses various points of interest. 
Although the Council’s and the NDF’s recommendations are based on different 
starting points, and different routes were followed in formulating the guidelines,  
the dietary recommendations relating to the conventional dietary intake in people 
already suffering from type 2 diabetes are similar. 
8 102

chapter 01 | Introduction 


1.4 Scope
Although the studies underlying the Dutch dietary guidelines mainly 
enlisted adults, the Dutch dietary guidelines are intended for the general 
population from the age of two years. The studies evaluated for this report 
were conducted in adults, although type 2 diabetes is becoming  
increasingly common in children and young adults. From reports on 
dietary guidelines for people with type 2 diabetes, the Committee found 
that little or no research has been done on children and young adults 4,11-16 
However, as with the Dutch dietary guidelines, the Committee sees no 
reason to believe that its dietary recommendations for people with type 2 
diabetes would not be a good basis for children and young adults with 
type 2 diabetes. 
The recommendations in the advisory report do not apply to people with 
type 2 diabetes who already require dietary advice for other conditions, 
such as celiac disease (gluten intolerance). 
In its evaluation, the Committee mainly found studies that excluded people 
with serious complications caused by type 2 diabetes, including clinically 
established macro- and micro-vascular disorders, such as myocardial 
infarction or severe retinal damage. The Committee’s basic assumption is 
that the Dutch dietary guidelines can also promote health in people with 
illnesses as long as there is no scientific evidence that suggests  
otherwise. No specific scientific evaluation exists for these groups, and 
according to the Committee’s assumption, the Dutch dietary guidelines 
can therefore serve as a basis for these groups. 
The Committee’s recommendations are aimed at promoting long-term 
health (prevention of the most common chronic diseases, as explained in 
Section 1.5 Methodology), which was also the objective of the Dutch 
dietary guidelines. For people with type 2 diabetes, management of daily 
blood glucose levels is of importance as well. The consumption of foods 
rich in complex carbohydrates and dietary fibre, which are recommended 
in the Dutch dietary guidelines 2015, contribute to that.17,18 However, the 
Committee did not evaluate the effects of dietary factors on acute, post-
prandial effects because the (individual) short-term management of blood 
glucose levels is not in the scope of the Dutch dietary guidelines, which 
focus on long-term prevention of chronic diseases. In addition to dietary 
intake, other factors, such as taking glucose-lowering medication and 
physical exercise, also influence blood glucose regulation in individuals 
throughout the day. Dieticians, together with other health professionals, 
can take these factors into account and offer tailored dietary advice. 
A healthy diet is part of a healthy lifestyle, but other lifestyle factors such 
as getting ample exercise and refraining from smoking are important for 
people’s general health, including those with type 2 diabetes. This  
advisory report is limited to dietary recommendations and does not 
address other lifestyle factors.
9 112

chapter 01 | Introduction 


1.5 Methodology
1.5.1 Working group
The Committee set up a working group that prepared the background 
documents and drew sub-conclusions for each dietary factor and health 
outcome, before deriving dietary recommendations from this set of sub-
conclusions. A list of the members of the Diabetes Working Group can be 
found at the back of this advisory report. A structured approach was 
followed in preparing this advisory report, as is described in detail in the 
background document Methodology for the evaluation of evidence.19
1.5.2 Dutch dietary guidelines as a starting point
The Committee used the Dutch dietary guidelines 2015 as a starting point 
and considered whether there were any indications that adjustments or 
additions might be needed for people with type 2 diabetes. This means 
that the Committee recommends that people with type 2 diabetes follow 
the Dutch dietary guidelines 2015, unless proven otherwise. Various  
treatment guidelines for people with type 2 diabetes, such as the NHG 
standard, already recommend following the Dutch dietary guidelines 
2015.2-4 The Committee also assumes that the Dutch dietary guidelines 
2015 are appropriate for people with type 2 diabetes because they are 
based on research in the general population and not just in the healthy 
population. Since part of the general population has type 2 diabetes, this 
group was implicitly included in the evaluations on which the Dutch dietary 
guidelines are based. The Dutch dietary guidelines focus on the  
prevention of common chronic diseases such as coronary heart disease 
and stroke, which people with type 2 diabetes have an increased risk of 
developing. However, studies carried out entirely on people already 
suffering from type 2 diabetes were not considered in preparing the Dutch 
dietary guidelines. An evaluation of such research could help formulate 
possible disease-specific adaptations or additions to the Dutch dietary 
guidelines for people with type 2 diabetes.
1.5.3 Selection of dietary factors 
In this advisory report, the Committee uses the term ‘dietary factors’ as an 
umbrella term for foods, beverages, nutrients and dietary patterns. 
For eight of the current dietary recommendations in the Dutch dietary 
guidelines, the Committee saw reasons to conduct a specific evaluation 
for people with type 2 diabetes, namely the guidelines on fruit and  
vegetables, whole grain foods, legumes, sugar-containing beverages, 
dairy products, coffee and salt. In addition, the Committee opted to  
evaluate carbohydrate-restricted dietary patterns. 
In selecting these topics, the Committee used Dutch and international 
reports with dietary guidelines for people with type 2 diabetes.4,11-16 The 
dietary factors covered in these reports were compared with the dietary 
factors evaluated for the Dutch dietary guidelines 2015. All dietary factors 
for which the Dutch dietary guidelines contain recommendations were also 
10 122

chapter 01 | Introduction 


covered in the aforementioned reports. All conclusions or  
recommendations for a dietary factor that differed from the Dutch dietary 
guidelines or that had not been evaluated for the Dutch dietary guidelines 
were considered eligible for evaluation by the Committee. The following 
considerations were also taken into account in selecting the dietary factors 
to be evaluated:
1. Coverage of the dietary factor in one or more of the aforementioned 
reports; 
2. Limited scientific evidence on this dietary factor in people with type 2 
diabetes in the aforementioned reports; 
3. The expert opinion of the Committee (for example: a dietary factor is 
under discussion among caregivers, policy officers, researchers and/or 
patients). 
A more detailed explanation of the selection of these individual dietary 
factors is given in the boxes on page 13 and 14.
Only dietary factors that fit into a conventional dietary pattern were 
selected, and dietary supplements or specific weight-loss diets (such as 
intermittent fasting or diets with strict energy restriction and meal  
replacements) were not considered. 
For those dietary factors from the Dutch dietary guidelines that were not 
evaluated by the Committee for the current advisory report, the Committee 
assumes that they are important for people with type 2 diabetes but that 
no adjustments are necessary for this group, based on the  
aforementioned reports.4,11-16
As many people with type 2 diabetes are overweight or obese and dietary 
intake is inextricably linked to energy balance, the Committee also 
addresses the importance of weight reduction. However, the Committee 
does not make any recommendations on how people with type 2 diabetes 
can best lose weight and therefore does not specifically address  
weight-loss diets. 
Some of the intervention studies on dietary factors from the Dutch dietary 
guidelines that have been evaluated in people with type 2 diabetes were 
carried out in combination with mild energy restriction. However, weight 
reduction was not a primary goal of these studies. In interpreting these 
studies, the Committee considered whether the prescribed amounts of 
energy materially differed between the intervention group and the control 
group. 
When reviewing intervention studies on a carbohydrate-restricted dietary 
pattern, it appeared that most of these studies were carried out with the 
underlying aim of losing weight, but the Committee did not necessarily 
select this diet as a weight-loss diet. Moreover, this dietary pattern is not 
only used for weight reduction, as it can also improve blood glucose 
211 13

chapter 01 | Introduction 


levels, which is why the Committee still included this dietary pattern in its 
advisory report. 
For people with type 2 diabetes looking to watch their weight (maintain 
their body weight or limit weight gain), the Committee has included in 
Chapter 5 several pointers with regard to choices that can be made within 
the food groups on which the Committee advises, such as product type 
and quantity. 
Selection of evaluated dietary factors
Dairy products Cohort studies show that higher consumption of certain 
subgroups of dairy products, such as yoghurt, is associated with a lower risk of 
developing type 2 diabetes.1 This raised the question among the Committee 
members as to whether dairy products are also beneficial for people who already 
have type 2 diabetes. The Committee wished to evaluate whether the dairy 
recommendation could be made more specific with regard to the fat content of the 
dairy for people with type 2 diabetes. This issue is addressed by only one of the 
reports with dietary guidelines for people with type 2 diabetes4 and, according to 
the Committee, it is currently the subject of debate. 
Coffee There is strong evidence from cohort studies that higher coffee  
consumption is associated with a lower risk of developing type 2 diabetes.1  
This raised the question among the Committee members of whether coffee 
consumption also benefits the long-term health of people who already have type 2 
diabetes. The association between coffee consumption and the long-term health 
of people already suffering from type 2 diabetes was addressed in only one of the 
reports with dietary guidelines for people with type 2 diabetes, dating from 2010.16 
In order to gain a good understanding of the current state of scientific knowledge 
by examining more recent literature, the Committee decided to include this topic 
in its evaluation. 
(continued on next page)
212 14

chapter 01 | Introduction 


Selection of evaluated dietary factors (continued)
Salt The Dutch dietary guidelines recommend eating no more than 6 grams of salt 
per day, which is equivalent to 2400 mg of sodium per day. According to the 
Committee, it has been debated whether the maximum sodium intake should be 
lower for people with type 2 diabetes, given their higher risk of developing chronick-
idney disease and cardiovascular disease.20 The Committee wished to evaluate 
whether the recommended maximum salt intake should be adjusted for people with 
type 2 diabetes. Salt is a topic that was also addressed in the reports with dietary 
guidelines for people with type 2 diabetes.4,11-14,16
Carbohydrate-restricted dietary patterns and carbohydrate sources Several 
dietary patterns, such as Mediterranean, DASH and vegetarian dietary patterns, 
were evaluated for the Dutch dietary guidelines. These dietary patterns were found 
to be beneficial for overall health. Since the diets in question shared many  
similarities, such as a relatively high intake of plant-based products and fish and a 
relatively low intake of red and processed meats and hard fats, the findings on 
these dietary patterns were ultimately reflected in the overarching recommendation 
to: ‘Follow a dietary pattern that involves eating more plant-based and less  
animal-based food’. The underlying principles of these dietary patterns are also 
reflected in the guidelines on the level of foods and beverages. The Committee 
found no discrepancies in conclusions about the dietary patterns in question, such 
as the Mediterranean diet, in reports with guidelines for people with type 2 diabetes. 
However, it did note that these reports do cover carbohydrate-restricted dietary 
patterns, which had not been evaluated for the Dutch dietary guidelines.4,11-16 
These dietary patterns are of particular interest to people with type 2 diabetes, due 
in part to the fact that carbohydrates directly affect blood glucose levels.21-27  
The Committee has therefore considered whether the Dutch dietary guidelines for 
people with type 2 diabetes should set a limit for the maximum recommended 
percentage of energy derived from carbohydrates.
As the Dutch dietary guidelines make recommendations about foods and given the 
fact that the quantity of carbohydrates and the quality of carbohydrate food sources 
(such as fruit and cereal products) can both matter for health28, the Committee 
evaluated the carbohydrate food sources about which the Dutch dietary guidelines 
made recommendations for people with type 2 diabetes. This includes vegetables, 
fruit, whole grain products, legumes and sugar-containing beverages. The 
Committee also evaluated the literature on dietary fibre from vegetables, fruit, 
whole grain and oat products for people with type 2 diabetes. These dietary factors 
were also addressed in reports presenting dietary guidelines for people with type 2 
diabetes.4,11-14,16
213 15

chapter 01 | Introduction 


1.5.4 Selection of health outcomes
The purpose of this advisory report is to promote the long-term health of 
people with type 2 diabetes. In its evaluation, the Committee used the 
same health outcomes used for the Dutch dietary guidelines. To this end, 
it looked at the top ten chronic diseases in the Netherlands measured in 
terms of mortality, years of life lost and burden of disease. In addition, the 
Committee searched for studies with all-cause mortality and chronic 
kidney disease as health outcomes.
As with the Dutch dietary guidelines, the Committee also considered 
so-called surrogate outcomes, which can be seen as substitute outcomes 
for chronic disease and reflect the causal pathway leading from a dietary 
factor to chronic disease.29 LDL cholesterol, for example, is a surrogate 
outcome for coronary heart disease. An advantage of such surrogate 
outcomes is that they make it possible to observe the effects of nutrition 
relatively soon. For example, effects on LDL cholesterol can be visible in a 
few weeks, whereas it takes years to observe effects on coronary heart 
disease. Surrogate outcomes included in this advisory report are body 
weight, systolic blood pressure and LDL cholesterol. The Committee also 
looked at HbA1c (a measure that gives an impression of the average 
blood glucose level over a number of months), fasting blood glucose level, 
and kidney function (estimated glomerular filtration rate, eGFR).
In scientific research, more and more attention is being paid to the possi-
bility of reversing type 2 diabetes with lifestyle interventions (diabetes 
remission; in which the use of diabetes medication is stopped for more 
than a year and HbA1c is lower than 48 mmol/mol) or reducing its severity 
(diabetes reversal; in which the use of diabetes medication is reduced for 
more than a year and HbA1c is lower than 54 mmol/mol). However, insuf-
ficient literature was available on these health outcomes that met the 
Committee’s inclusion criteria, e.g. because diet was examined as part of 
a larger package of lifestyle interventions or because intervention studies 
were not randomised. Therefore, the Commission does not address the 
relationship of the selected nutritional factors to diabetes remission or 
reversal in this advisory report, and none of its recommendations relate to 
said phenomena. 
1.5.5 Literature review and data integration
To evaluate the health effects of the selected dietary factors in people with 
type 2 diabetes, the Committee conducted a literature review, relying 
primarily on meta-analyses, pooled analyses and systematic reviews. Two 
types of studies were described and assessed: randomised controlled 
trials (RCTs) and prospective cohort studies. A prospective cohort study 
examines the relationship between diet and chronic disease by monitoring 
a group of individuals for an extended period of time. In RCTs, participants 
are divided into groups by drawing lots, with one group receiving the  
treatment of which the researchers want to measure the effects, and the 
214 16

chapter 01 | Introduction 


other group serving as a control. Both study types have their own  
advantages and disadvantages and complement each other. When RCTs 
are available, the Committee speaks of effects; for findings based on 
cohort studies, the Committee uses the term associations. In addition to 
meta-analyses, pooled analyses and systematic reviews, the Committee 
searched for individual RCTs and cohort studies. 
In each case, the Committee indicates whether the strength of evidence 
for an effect or association is strong or limited. Strength of evidence is 
determined on the basis of the size (number of sub-studies and  
participants), quality and uniformity of the studies, before weighing all 
evidence for each food group in its entirety. The Committee considers an 
effect convincing if strong evidence from cohort studies and RCTs support 
each other or if there is strong evidence from RCTs. If there is only strong 
evidence based on cohort studies, the Committee considers the effect 
plausible. All degrees of evidence (including limited evidence) can support 
an existing recommendation in the Dutch dietary guidelines 2015. The 
difference between ‘convincing’ and ‘plausible’ is usually reflected in the 
wording of the associated guideline. If there is ‘convincing’ evidence, the 
associated guideline will usually contain a quantitative recommendation 
(eat or take a certain amount); while no quantitative recommendation will 
usually be given if the evidence is only ‘plausible’. Only convincing 
evidence can give rise to modifying an existing recommendation in the 
Dutch dietary guidelines 2015 for people with type 2 diabetes. 
To evaluate the health effects of carbohydrate-restricted dietary patterns, 
the Committee used a report from the Scientific Advisory Committee on 
Nutrition (SACN; UK) published in 2021 as its point of departure.15 This 
report contains a review of the scientific evidence on the effects of  
carbohydrate-restricted dietary patterns in people with type 2 diabetes. 
The literature selected by SACN was supplemented by more recent  
literature. 
1.6 Reading guide
In Chapter 2, the Committee briefly discusses the importance of weight 
reduction for people with type 2 diabetes who are overweight or obese. In 
Chapter 3, it discusses findings on the evaluated foods and beverages 
from the Dutch dietary guidelines, indicating whether these findings give 
rise to any changes to the recommendations for people with type 2 
diabetes. In Chapter 4, the Committee examines the effects of carbo-  
hydrate-restricted dietary patterns on the health of people with type 2 
diabetes. Finally, Chapter 5 lists the recommendations and provides some 
additional advice.
215 17

chapter 01 | Introduction 


02 
weight reduction 
and maintenance 
216 18

chapter 02 | Weight reduction and maintenance 


The Committee recommends that people with type 2 diabetes who are 
overweight or obese should aim for weight reduction and maintain their 
reduced weight in the long term. For people that aim to lose weight, an 
energy-restricted diet can be compiled based on the Dutch dietary  
guidelines. However, weight reduction is complex and usually requires 
addressing multiple factors, including lifestyle-related factors, at the same 
time. The Committee stresses that a multi-factorial approach is important, 
but does not discuss the broad range of options that can contribute to 
weight reduction and maintenance in this advisory report.
2.1 Recommendation
In the case of overweight and/or obesity, aim for at least 5% weight  
reduction and maintain this in the long term. 
2.2 Explanation
A large number of people with type 2 diabetes are overweight or obese, 
and weight reduction can have significant health benefits for these people. 
Because dietary intake is inextricably linked to energy balance, the 
Committee issues additional recommendations on weight reduction for 
people with type 2 diabetes, supplementing the recommendations given 
on the Dutch dietary guidelines.
Definition of overweight and obesity
By overweight, the Committee means a Body Mass Index (BMI) between 25 and 
30 kg/m2 for adults up to the age of 70 and a BMI between 28 and 30 kg/m2 for 
people over 70. Older adults have the lowest risk of mortality with a higher BMI 
than younger adults, which is why the lower limit for overweight in the elderly is 
higher. The Committee defines obesity as a BMI of 30 kg/m2 or higher for all 
adults. There are age-dependent cut-off points for children.30,31 
The Committee also wishes to note that the health risks of being overweight or 
obese are not determined by BMI alone. The health risks of being overweight or 
obese for instance increase when people also have accumulations of abdominal 
fat.32 
2.2.1 Findings on weight reduction and maintenance
A meta-analysis (2015) of regular lifestyle intervention studies shows that 
5% weight reduction is feasible and can help to improve the health of 
people with type 2 diabetes. The meta-analysis shows that weight  
reduction of 5% or more in people with type 2 diabetes who are  
overweight or obese can lead to significant improvements in their HbA1c, 
blood lipid values and blood pressure.33 A more recent intervention study 
shows that more than 5% weight reduction is possible in some people with 
type 2 diabetes and that this can be maintained over a period of several 
years. The success factors underlying said weight reduction and  
maintenance are not yet clear, but it is likely that the intensive supervision 
in the intervention study played an important role in the success, as did 
the participants’ profiles. The participants had, for instance, been  
217 19

chapter 02 | Weight reduction and maintenance 


diagnosed with diabetes relatively recently and did not use insulin therapy. 
Furthermore, an additional analysis showed that 64% of people with type 
2 diabetes had diabetes remission when they maintained a weight  
reduction of 10 kg or more for two years.34 
Other methods can also help achieve weight reduction, but exhaustively 
listing these methods is beyond the scope of this advisory report. 
2.2.2 The Dutch dietary guidelines and weight reduction
The Dutch dietary guidelines advise on dietary quality and are not 
designed with the primary goal of weight reduction. Nevertheless, people 
can also restrict their energy intake with a dietary pattern based on the 
Dutch dietary guidelines. Section 5.2.2 explains how to take energy (and 
nutrient) requirements into account in translating the Committee’s advice 
into a recommendation for an individual with type 2 diabetes. Energy-
restricted eating based on the Dutch dietary guidelines should be seen in 
a wider context of weight-reduction interventions, as weight reduction can 
be achieved in several ways, is a complex process and often requires a 
multifactorial approach.31,35-37
2.2.3 Weight reduction in children and the elderly
In children, weight reduction should take growth into account. In the 
elderly, the consensus is that weight reduction should only be considered 
in cases of obesity, partly because there is also loss of bone and muscle 
mass during weight loss.38 
218 20

chapter 02 | Weight reduction and maintenance 


03 
dutch dietary guidelines
219 21

chapter 03 | Dutch dietary guidelines 


The Dutch dietary guidelines describe the recommended intake of foods 
and beverages for the prevention of chronic diseases. A limited number of 
studies have been found that address the dietary factors from the Dutch 
dietary guidelines 2015 in relation to the health of people with type 2 
diabetes. Based on the studies found, the Committee sees no reason to 
recommend deviations from the Dutch dietary guidelines 2015 for this 
population. 
3.1 Recommendation
The Dutch dietary guidelines are a suitable basis for a healthy and varied 
dietary pattern for people with type 2 diabetes. 
3.2 Explanation
The Committee evaluated the 2015 dietary guidelines for fruit, vegetables, 
whole grain foods, legumes, sugar-containing beverages, dairy products, 
coffee and salt for people with type 2 diabetes. For the remaining 2015 
guidelines, the Committee assumes, based on its expertise and evidence-
based dietary guidelines published by other organisations, that no  
adjustments are needed for people with type 2 diabetes.4,11-16 In this 
chapter, the Committee describes its findings for each of the dietary  
guidelines it evaluated.
3.2.1 Findings on fruit and vegetables 
Evaluated dietary factors
The Committee focused on studies that examined the intake of fruit and/or  
vegetables. The definition of fruit and vegetables is based on nutritional value, 
taste and culinary application.39 Fresh fruit, dried fruit and canned fruit were all 
considered fruit. The definition does not cover fruit or vegetable juices, because 
they have different nutritional values and food matrices. The evaluated studies 
dealt mainly with fresh fruit.40
The Committee intended to include studies on dietary fibre from fruit and  
vegetables to supplement the evidence from studies on fruit and vegetables, but 
could not find sufficient relevant research. The Committee mainly found RCTs on 
supplementation with isolated dietary fibre. Those studies were not included 
because the effects of isolated and processed fibres on health outcomes may 
differ substantially from the effects of fibre from the regular diet.41 The Committee 
also found studies on fibre from a combination of different foods. Those studies 
were not included because the results of such studies cannot provide sufficient 
information about the health effects of specific fruit and/or vegetables.42
Table 1 describes the Committee’s conclusions. Based on cohort studies, 
the Committee found it plausible that each 100 gram higher intake of fruit 
reduced the risk of cardiovascular disease with 15% in people with type 2 
diabetes. This conclusion was based on studies in which the participants 
ate no more than 400 grams of fruit a day and supports the  
recommendation on fruit in the Dutch dietary guidelines. The cohort 
220 22

chapter 03 | Dutch dietary guidelines 


studies did not show any unfavourable associations between fruit 
consumption and the health of people with type 2 diabetes. Based on 
these findings, the Committee concludes that there is no reason to deviate 
from the existing guideline for fruit for people with type 2 diabetes. The 
Committee cannot make any statements about adjusting any quantities 
specified in the guideline, because the evidence found is plausible (and 
not convincing; as no RCTs were found). 
The Committee also found, based on cohort studies, that a higher intake 
of vegetables is associated with a lower risk of all-cause mortality. This 
finding supports the recommendation on vegetables in the Dutch dietary 
guidelines.
Table 1 Overview of conclusions on the associations of fruit and vegetable  
consumption with health outcomes based on cohort studies in people with  
type 2 diabetesa.
Health outcomeb Fruit Vegetables Combination of fruit 
and vegetables
All-cause mortality Inconclusive evidence A higher intake is 
associated with a lower 
risk; limited evidence
No (relevant) studies 
found
Morbidity or mortality 
due to cardiovascular 
disease 
The risk decreases by 
15% with every 100 g/d 
higher intake; strong 
evidence
Too little research Too little research
Morbidity due to 
coronary heart disease
Too little research No (relevant) studies 
found
No (relevant) studies 
found
Morbidity due to stroke Too little research No (relevant) studies 
found
No (relevant) studies 
found
Mortality due to cancer Too little research Too little research No (relevant) studies 
found
a More information on how the Committee reached these conclusions can be found in the background document 
Fruit and vegetables.40 
b The table lists the outcome measures for which (relevant) studies were found. For the outcome measures not 
shown in the table, no (relevant) studies were found. 
221 23

chapter 03 | Dutch dietary guidelines 


3.2.2 Findings on whole grain foods 
Evaluated dietary factors 
The Committee focused on studies on the intake of whole grain foods or oat 
products. Studies on dietary fibre from whole grain foods and oat products were 
also considered. Studies on supplementation with isolated dietary fibre and 
studies on dietary fibre from a combination of different foods were excluded (for 
the same reasons given in the section on fruit and vegetables).42,43
Table 2 describes the Committee’s conclusions. There is too little research 
available on the effects of consuming whole grain foods or oat products on 
the health of people with type 2 diabetes. However, there are systematic 
reviews that include some relevant RCTs on the short-term effects of 
dietary fibre from whole grain foods and oat products on surrogate out-
comes in people with type 2 diabetes. The RCTs described in these 
reviews are generally quite limited in size and there is a lot of variation 
between the RCTs (e.g. in the duration of the study and the amount of 
fibre examined). Results might also have been biased due to high dropout 
rates and poor dietary compliance in some RCTs. These differences and 
limitations have probably led to the fact that there is no conclusive 
evidence on the effects of dietary fibre from whole grain foods on fasting 
blood glucose levels. Both favourable and neutral effects were reported, 
while no unfavourable effects were found. There are too few RCTs to draw 
conclusions about the effects on other surrogate outcomes, such as 
HbA1c. 
The Committee concludes that, for people with type 2 diabetes, there is no 
reason to deviate from the recommendations on whole grain foods in the 
Dutch dietary guidelines, because too few studies were found on this 
subject. For the effects of dietary fibre from whole grain foods on fasting 
blood glucose levels, the Committee found both favourable and neutral 
results, and thus no unfavourable results. Therefore, the Committee sees 
no reason to adjust the recommendation on whole grain foods for people 
with type 2 diabetes. 
Table 2 Overview of conclusions on the associations of consumption of (dietary fibre 
from) whole grain foods and oat products with health outcomes in people with type 2 
diabetesa.
Health outcomeb Type of study Results
All-cause mortality Cohort studies Too little research 
Mortality due to cardiovascular 
disease 
Cohort studies Too little research
HbA1c RCTs Too little research
Fasting blood glucose levels RCTs Inconclusive evidencec
Body weight RCTs Too little research
LDL cholesterol RCTs Too little research
Systolic blood pressure RCTs Too little research
a More information on how the Committee reached these conclusions can be found in the background documents 
Whole grain foods and Dietary fibre.42,43 
b The table lists the outcome measures for which (relevant) studies were found. For the outcome measures not 
shown in the table, no (relevant) studies were found. 
c Over a period of 1 to 3 months. Too little research was found to allow conclusions to be drawn about effects over 
a one-year period. 
222 24

chapter 03 | Dutch dietary guidelines 


3.2.3 Findings on legumes 
Evaluated dietary factors
The Committee focused on studies on the intake of legumes. By legumes, the 
Committee means beans, soybeans, lentils, chickpeas and split peas. Peanuts, 
green peas, podded peas, broad beans and French beans do not belong to the 
legumes in this advisory report, in accordance with the method adopted for the 
Dutch dietary guidelines (where the aforementioned foods are classified as nuts 
or vegetables).1 
The Committee evaluated soybeans and other legumes separately because 
soybeans contain more fat, are processed differently and contain isoflavones. 
However, too little relevant research on soybeans was found. The Committee 
mainly found RCTs on the effects of supplementation with isolated substances 
from soybeans, such as isoflavones and soy protein. Those studies were not 
included because isolated substances may have different health effects than  
the whole product.44
Table 3 shows the Committee’s conclusions. Cohort studies show that a 
higher consumption of legumes is associated with a lower risk of mortality 
due to cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality. The level of 
evidence is limited due to some heterogeneity in the findings between 
studies and methodological limitations in one of the evaluated studies.  
For cancer mortality, both neutral and protective associations were found 
with higher legume consumption. The favourable associations emerging 
from cohort studies are corroborated by findings from RCTs. Those RCTs 
show that consumption of legumes, compared to other foods, can reduce 
HbA1c, fasting blood glucose levels and body weight in people with type 2 
diabetes. Again, the evidence is limited. This is partly because the RCTs 
are rather small, differ in design (such as study duration, amount and type 
of legumes and type of control food) and a number of studies had  
potentially biased results. 
The limited evidence available for people with type 2 diabetes supports 
the recommendation on legumes in the Dutch dietary guidelines. 
Table 3 Overview of conclusions on the associations between consumption of 
legumes and health outcomes in people with type 2 diabetesa.
Health outcomeb Type of study Results
All-cause mortality Cohort studies A higher intake is associated with a 
lower risk; limited evidence
Mortality due to cardiovascular 
disease 
Cohort studies A higher intake is associated with a 
lower risk; limited evidence
Mortality due to cancer Cohort studies Inconclusive evidence
HbA1c RCTs A higher intake has a reducing 
effectc; limited evidence
Fasting blood glucose levels RCTs A higher intake has a reducing 
effectc; limited evidence
Body weight RCTs A higher intake has a reducing 
effectc; limited evidence
LDL cholesterol RCTs Too little research
Systolic blood pressure RCTs Too little research
a More information on how the Committee reached these conclusions can be found in the background document 
Legumes.44 
b The table lists the outcome measures for which (relevant) studies were found. For the outcome measures not 
shown in the table, no (relevant) studies were found. 
c Over a period of 1 to 3 months. 
223 25

chapter 03 | Dutch dietary guidelines 


3.2.4  Findings on sugar-containing beverages 
Evaluated dietary factors 
 The Committee intended to base its assertions on studies that compared the 
consumption of sugar-containing beverages with the consumption of beverages 
without added sugar (in RCTs) or a lower consumption of sugar-containing  
beverages (in cohort studies). By sugar-containing beverages, the Committee 
means cold beverages with added sucrose, fructose or glucose, as well as  
beverages that naturally contain sugars, such as fruit juices. 
The Committee did not find any appropriate RCTs for its evaluation. It mainly 
found reviews of RCTs on the effects of fructose compared to a similar amount of 
energy from other carbohydrates, such as glucose or starch. The Committee did 
not include these studies in its evaluation of sugar-containing beverages because 
they examine the substitution of different kinds of carbohydrates, rather than 
beverages with and without sugars. Moreover, in the vast majority of studies, 
participants were not or not only given carbohydrates in the form of beverages. 
The Committee did not find sufficient appropriate cohort studies for its  
evaluation.40,45
The Committee did not find sufficient relevant research on sugar-
containing beverages in people with type 2 diabetes. It therefore 
concludes that, for people with type 2 diabetes, there is no basis for  
deviating from the recommendation in the Dutch dietary guidelines to drink 
as few sugar-containing beverages as possible. More information on the 
Committee’s evaluation of sugar-containing beverages can be found in the 
background documents Beverages with added sugar and Fruit and vege-
tables.40,45
224 26

chapter 03 | Dutch dietary guidelines 


3.2.5 Findings on dairy products 
Evaluated dietary factors 
The Committee searched for studies on the intake of dairy products. By dairy 
products, the Committee means milk and products made from milk, such as 
yoghurt and cheese. The Committee also searched for studies that distinguished 
between sub-groups of dairy: whole, semi-skimmed and skimmed milk products 
and specific (groupings of) dairy products such as milk, fermented products, 
yoghurt and cheese. In this advisory report, butter is not classified with dairy 
products. The Committee did not find sufficient studies that could be used for its 
evaluation of dairy products in general or for sub-groups of dairy product.
The Committee did find RCTs on probiotic dairy, fortified dairy (such as with 
vitamin D or calcium) and dairy protein. Almost all studies on probiotic and 
fortified dairy products compare these products with a non-probiotic or non- 
fortified dairy product. As such, these studies cannot be used to determine the 
effect of the dairy product itself, for which reason they were excluded from the 
Committee’s evaluation. Studies on the effects of dairy proteins, such as whey 
and casein, focused on acute effects (within a few hours) on the regulation of 
blood glucose levels. These studies were therefore also excluded. The primary 
focus of the Committee is long-term health and it is unclear to what extent acute 
effects can be translated into the longer term.46
The Committee did not find sufficient relevant research on health effects 
of dairy products in people with type 2 diabetes. It therefore concludes 
that, for people with type 2 diabetes, there is no basis for deviating from 
the recommendation in the Dutch dietary guidelines to take several 
portions of dairy a day. The Committee also sought to specifically identify 
whether there were any studies on full-fat versus skimmed or semi-
skimmed dairy products in people with type 2 diabetes. However, too little 
research was found to draw any conclusions. The recommendation on 
dairy products in the Dutch dietary guidelines does not distinguish 
between the fat content of dairy products, because there was insufficient 
scientific basis for doing so. The Committee sees no basis for deviating 
from this for people with type 2 diabetes. More information on the  
Committee’s evaluation of dairy products can be found in the background 
document Dairy products.46
225 27

chapter 03 | Dutch dietary guidelines 


3.2.6 Findings on coffee
 
Evaluated dietary factors 
The Committee focused on studies on coffee intake. Where possible, the 
Committee distinguished between filtered and unfiltered coffee and between 
caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee. Cohort studies on caffeine from coffee  
were also included, as these also reflect coffee consumption. Cohort studies on 
caffeine in general were not included, as caffeine is also found in other foods 
(such as tea and soft drinks) and the results of these studies therefore provide 
insufficient information about the health effects of coffee.
RCTs were found on the acute effects (within a few hours) of coffee on the  
regulation of blood glucose levels, but these were not included. The primary focus 
of the Committee is long-term health and it is unclear to what extent acute effects 
can be translated into the longer term.47
The Dutch dietary guidelines recommend replacing unfiltered coffee with 
filtered coffee, because unfiltered coffee can increase LDL cholesterol.  
No studies on filtered versus unfiltered coffee in relation to LDL cholesterol 
(or other health outcomes) in people with type 2 diabetes were found. 
However, the Committee did specifically look for studies on the  
association between coffee consumption and chronic diseases, since a 
protective association with strong evidence was found between coffee 
consumption and the risk of type 2 diabetes when preparing the Dutch 
dietary guidelines 2015. 
Table 4 describes the Committee’s conclusions. Based on cohort studies, 
the Committee found it plausible that drinking coffee is associated with a 
lower risk of cardiovascular disease. It found that drinking two to four cups 
of coffee a day is associated with a 20 to 30% lower risk of cardiovascular 
disease compared to drinking no coffee or sporadically drinking coffee in 
people with type 2 diabetes (strong evidence). These studies involved 
caffeinated coffee or a mix of caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee, with no 
apparent difference in how these associate with the risk of cardiovascular 
disease. The studies often did not specify how the coffee was prepared 
but, based on the countries of origin of the studies, the Committee expects 
that most of the coffee consumed by the participants was filtered. 
Based on this, the Committee sees no reason to adjust the  
recommendation from the Dutch dietary guidelines (replace unfiltered 
coffee with filtered coffee) for people with type 2 diabetes. The Committee 
cannot add any quantities to the recommendation, as the association 
found was only ‘plausible’ (and not ‘convincing’).
226 28

chapter 03 | Dutch dietary guidelines 


Table 4 Overview of conclusions on the associations between coffee intake and health 
outcomes based on cohort studies in people with type 2 diabetesa.
Health outcomeb Results
All-cause mortality A higher intake is associated with a lower risk; limited 
evidence
Morbidity or mortality due to 
cardiovascular disease 
Drinking two to four cups of coffee a day is associated with a 
20 to 30% lower risk compared to not drinking coffee or 
sporadically drinking coffee; strong evidence.
Morbidity or mortality due to 
cardiovascular disease 
A higher intake is associated with a lower risk; limited 
evidence
Morbidity or mortality due to stroke Too little research
Mortality due to cancer Too little research
a More information on how the Committee reached these conclusions can be found in the background document 
Coffee.47 
b The table lists the outcome measures for which (relevant) studies were found. For the outcome measures not 
shown in the table, no (relevant) studies were found. 
3.2.7 Findings on salt
Evaluated dietary factors 
The Committee focused on studies on the intake of salt (sodium chloride) or 
sodium. The Committee also included studies on sodium chloride supplements, 
as it considers these to be similar to adding table salt (sodium chloride). The 
Committee examined studies where salt or sodium intake was measured in urine 
collected (preferably repeatedly) over 24 hours, as this method is more reliable 
than a questionnaire.48 
Table 5 describes the Committee’s conclusions. RCTs show that a lower 
intake of sodium can reduce (systolic) blood pressure in people with type 
2 diabetes, although the evidence is limited. This is partly because the 
studies are quite small and there is some heterogeneity in findings 
between studies. The favourable effect of a lower sodium intake supports 
the recommendation on salt in the Dutch dietary guidelines to limit the 
intake of salt to no more than 6 grams per day. Based on the RCTs found, 
the Committee does not rule out the possibility that a further reduction in 
salt intake has a favourable or more favourable effect on blood pressure in 
people with type 2 diabetes. However, there is currently too little research 
to say this with certainty and/or to establish a specific recommended 
quantity of salt. 
Table 5 Overview of conclusions on the associations between sodium intake and 
health outcomes in people with type 2 diabetesa.
Health outcomeb Type of study Results
All-cause mortality Cohort studies Too little research
Mortality due to cardiovascular 
disease 
Cohort studies Too little research
Morbidity due to cardiovascular 
disease 
Cohort studies Too little research
Morbidity due to coronary heart 
disease, stroke or heart failure 
Cohort studies Too little research
HbA1c RCTs Too little research
Systolic blood pressure RCTs A lower intake has a reducing 
effectc; limited evidence
a More information on how the Committee reached these conclusions can be found in the background document 
Sodium.48 
b The table lists the outcome measures for which (relevant) studies were found. For the outcome measures not 
shown in the table, no (relevant) studies were found. 
c Over a period of 5 days to 3 months. 
227 29

chapter 03 | Dutch dietary guidelines 


04 
carbohydrate-restricted 
dietary pattern
228 30

chapter 04 | Carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern 


The Committee sees no reason to recommend carbohydrate restriction to 
people with type 2 diabetes. However, it also sees no reason to advise 
against carbohydrate restriction for people with type 2 diabetes who aim to 
reduce their energy intake, provided that care is taken to ensure that the 
dietary pattern provides sufficient quantities of important nutrients and that 
the Dutch dietary guidelines are taken into account in the compilation of 
the dietary pattern. Therefore, guidance from a dietician is recommended.
4.1 Recommendation
A carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern may help achieve short-term 
weight reduction and improve glucose metabolism in people with type 2 
diabetes who are overweight or obese, but it is not recommended to 
improve long-term health. This dietary pattern is also not discouraged for 
people with type 2 diabetes who are overweight or obese and aim to 
reduce their energy intake. Guidance from a dietician is preferable.
4.2 Explanation
The Committee’s recommendation is based on research into health effects 
over a period no longer than 1 year. The effects of following a carbo-  
hydrate-restricted dietary pattern for an extended period of time (more 
than a year) are not sufficiently known. 
The Committee’s recommendation is based on research into the effects of 
prescribing a carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern in conjunction with 
energy-restriction, and compared with another dietary pattern that reduces 
energy intake in a different way. This is because the studies that were 
deemed suitable for the Committee’s evaluation always compared the 
health effects of a carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern with the effects 
of another dietary pattern, both of which were generally energy-restricted 
diets. 
The evaluated studies were conducted in people with type 2 diabetes who 
were also overweight or obese, which is why the Committee’s  
recommendation applies to this group of people. 
4.2.1 Findings on carbohydrate restriction
The box on pages 31 and 32 describes the evaluated carbohydrate-
restricted dietary patterns and the dietary patterns with which they were 
compared. Table 6 describes the Committee’s conclusions on the effects 
of dietary patterns with very low, low and moderate amounts of carbo- 
hydrates on health outcomes. 
229 31

chapter 04 | Carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern 


Evaluated dietary factors
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates can be divided into digestible and indigestible carbohydrates. 
Digestible carbohydrates are energy-providing nutrients (along with proteins, fats, 
some dietary fibres and, optionally, alcohol). A distinction can be made between 
mono- and disaccharides (also called sugars), oligosaccharides, polysaccharides 
and polyols. 
• Monosaccharides: The main monosaccharides are glucose and fructose. 
These are found in products such as fruit, fruit juice and certain vegetables 
such as cabbage and pumpkin. 
• Disaccharides: The main disaccharides are sucrose and lactose. Sucrose is 
found in soft drinks, cakes and biscuits, and sugar, jam and chocolate.  
Lactose occurs naturally only in milk and milk products.
• Oligosaccharides: Malto-oligosaccharides are mainly derived from partially 
hydrolysed starch. Fully and partially hydrolysed starch and high-fructose corn 
syrup are increasingly used in certain countries, especially the United States,  
to replace sucrose in sweets and soft drinks.
• Polysaccharides: The main polysaccharide is starch. Major sources of starch 
are cereal products such as bread, rice and pasta, tuberous plants (potatoes) 
and legumes.
• Polyols: These are sugar alcohols used as sweeteners in food. According to 
European legislation, they fall into the category of carbohydrates, but they are 
not classified with ‘saccharides’.49 
Indigestible carbohydrates are dietary fibres. 
Carbohydrate-restricted dietary patterns
A carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern is a dietary pattern with relatively few 
carbohydrates and relatively large quantities of protein and/or fat. The Committee 
evaluated the health effects of prescribing:
1. A diet or dietary pattern low or very low in carbohydrates: 
a. Very low means: 20 to 50 grams of carbohydrates per day; 10% or less of 
the overall energy intake comes from carbohydrates. Such a dietary pattern 
is also known as a ketogenic diet.
b. Low means between 50 and 130 grams of carbohydrates a day; 10 to 26% 
of the overall energy intake comes from carbohydrates;
The Committee also refers to this as a low or very low-carbohydrate ‘diet’, 
because it differs significantly from the usual dietary pattern of the average 
adult Dutch person. To illustrate: on average, Dutch adults obtain 43% of their 
daily energy from carbohydrates50, while the included studies evaluated a 
carbohydrate intake that, in many cases, did not exceed 20% of the overall 
energy intake.
2. A dietary pattern with a moderate amount of carbohydrates: 130 to 230 grams 
of carbohydrates per day; 26 to 45% of the overall energy intake comes from 
carbohydrates. The committee refers to this as a ‘dietary pattern’ with a 
moderate amount of carbohydrates, because the percentage of carbohydrates 
in such a dietary pattern differs little from that of the average Dutch adult (43% 
of the overall energy intake).50 The included studies mostly evaluated a 
carbohydrate intake equal to about 40% of the overall energy intake. 
230 32

chapter 04 | Carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern 


Evaluated dietary factors (continued)
The aforementioned definition is based on the most common classification of carbo-
hydrates, that of Feinman et al.51 As there were too few studies for a stand-alone 
evaluation of very low-carbohydrate diets, the Committee combined very low and 
low-carbohydrate diets in its evaluation. Any reference to carbohydrate-restricted 
dietary patterns in this advisory report refers to very low, low and moderate-carbo-
hydrate dietary patterns. 
In the reviewed studies, the carbohydrate-restricted dietary patterns were mostly 
examined with the underlying goal of weight loss. The carbohydrate-restricted 
dietary patterns were not always prescribed with an energy restriction, but usually 
led to a reduction in energy intake, most likely due to the limited food choices 
available to participants. 
The definition of carbohydrate-restricted dietary patterns does not distinguish 
between the type of carbohydrates (such as sugars or starches) or which dietary 
sources of carbohydrates (such as fruit, grain products, sugar-containing  
beverages) are restricted. As the evaluated studies only report on this distinction to 
a limited extent, the Committee was also unable to make a distinction between the 
type and/or source of carbohydrates in its evaluation.52 
Diets used for comparison
The carbohydrate-restricted dietary patterns were compared with various other 
dietary patterns, such as low-fat, low-glycaemic-index, energy-restricted dietary 
patterns and dietary patterns in line with the treatment guidelines for type 2 
diabetes. Most of these dietary patterns were energy-restricted. It is likely that the 
dietary patterns to which the carbohydrate-restricted dietary patterns are compared 
also impacted health. Due to the wide variety of dietary patterns in the studies, it 
was not possible to distinguish between them in the evaluation. However, the 
Committee did consider whether the dietary patterns to which the carbohydrate-
restricted dietary patterns were compared were relatively high in protein, fat or both. 
It was not possible to distinguish between the subtypes of fat (such as saturated, 
monounsaturated, polyunsaturated) or protein (such as plant-based or animal 
protein).52
231 33

chapter 04 | Carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern 


Very low or low-carbohydrate diet 
The Committee found a convincing effect based on strong evidence from 
RCTs, namely that, compared to a different energy-restricted dietary 
pattern, prescribing a low or very-low carbohydrate diet leads to a 0.36% 
to 0.49% reduction in HbA1c and 2.5 kg in body weight in the short term 
(3 to 6 months). A short-term reduction in fasting blood glucose levels was 
also found (limited evidence). In the Committee’s view, it is uncertain 
whether these effects on HbA1c and body weight are clinically meaningful, 
as they are short-lived. 
No studies were found on the occurrence of long-term chronic diseases, 
such as cardiovascular disease, in relation to a very low or low-carbo-  
hydrate diet. However, several RCTS were found that examined the 
longer-term effects on surrogate health outcomes, which usually covered 
a 12-month period. These studies showed no difference between 
prescribing a very low or low-carbohydrate diet and other energy-
restricted diets with more carbohydrates in terms of the effect on HbA1c, 
body weight and other health outcomes. 
In the evaluated studies, the Committee noted the participants had  
difficulties to adhere to a very low or low-carbohydrate diet in the long 
term, which may explain, at least in part, why the beneficial effects of a 
very low or low-carbohydrate diet were not seen in the longer term. 
Dietary pattern with a moderate amount of carbohydrates 
The evaluated RCTs show no relevant difference between prescribing a 
dietary pattern with a moderate amount of carbohydrates and a dietary 
pattern with more carbohydrates that restricts energy intake in another 
way in terms of the effect on the health of people with type 2 diabetes. 
This applies to both the short and longer term (usually 12 months). 
However, the Committee did see variation in the effects (favourable, 
neutral and unfavourable) of a dietary pattern with a moderate amount of 
carbohydrates on LDL cholesterol. This point merits further attention (see 
Section 4.2.2).
Energy restriction 
In most cases, the evaluated dietary patterns were restricted in energy 
intake. As explained in Chapter 2, weight reduction can have health  
benefits for people with type 2 diabetes. Energy restriction, in the broader 
context of weight reduction interventions, can contribute to this. Based on 
the evaluated studies, it seems to make little or no difference whether 
energy restriction is achieved through carbohydrate restriction or another 
dietary pattern that restricts energy intake in another way. However, the 
Committee was unable to make a specific comparison with other dietary 
patterns, because the dietary patterns to which carbohydrate-restricted 
dietary patterns were compared in the studies were very diverse. 
232 34

chapter 04 | Carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern 


Conclusion 
The Committee’s conclusions are applicable to people with type 2 
diabetes who are overweight or obese and aim to reduce their energy 
intake. Based on the aforementioned findings, the Committee concludes 
that in order to promote long-term health, it sees no reason to recommend 
carbohydrate restriction to people with type 2 diabetes. However, the 
Committee also sees no reason to advise against it. Personalising nutri-
tional advice based on, for example, preferences can help people adhere 
to a healthy dietary pattern.53 People with type 2 diabetes can opt for 
carbohydrate restriction, though it must be noted that guidance from a 
dietician is preferred in this case. 
Table 6 Overview of conclusions on the effects of a carbohydrate-restricted dietary 
pattern compared to higher-carbohydrate dietary pattern on health outcomes based on 
RCTs in people with type 2 diabetes.a
Health outcomeb Short-term effectsc 
of very low and 
low-carbohydrate 
diets 
Long-term effectsc 
of very low and 
low-carbohydrate 
diets
Short-term 
effects of a 
moderate-
carbohydrate 
dietary pattern
Long-term 
effects of a 
moderate-
carbohydrate 
dietary pattern
HbA1c Reduction of 0.36 to 
0.49%; 
strong evidence
No difference No difference No difference
Body weight 3 months: 
Reduction of 2.5 kg; 
strong evidence
6 months: 
No difference
No difference No difference Reduction of 0.6 
kg; limited 
evidence
Fasting blood 
glucose levels
Reducing effect; 
limited evidence
Too little research Too little 
research
Too little 
research
LDL cholesterol No difference Contradictory 
results
No difference Contradictory 
results
Systolic blood 
pressure
Too little research Too little research Too little 
research
Too little 
research
eGFR Too little research Too little research Too little 
research
Too little 
research
a More information on how the Committee reached these conclusions can be found in the background document 
Reduced carbohydrate diets.52 
b The table lists the outcome measures for which (relevant) studies were found. For the outcome measures not 
shown in the table, no (relevant) studies were found. 
c Short-term means: 3 to 6 months; long-term means: 1 year or more.
233 35

chapter 04 | Carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern 


4.2.2 Points to consider with carbohydrate-restricted dietary 
patterns
The Committee has a number of concerns that are important when 
following a carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern.
Professional guidance
It is recommended that carbohydrate-restricted dietary patterns, and very 
low or low-carbohydrate diets in particular, be followed only under the 
guidance of a dietician who can help ensure that the dietary pattern is 
healthy and complete.
Carbohydrate restriction and Dutch dietary guidelines 
To promote long-term health, the Committee recommends to take into 
account the Dutch dietary guidelines in the compilation of carbohydrate-
restricted dietary patterns. In this context, the Committee has identified 
two points that merit specific attention. 
First, it recommends reducing carbohydrates by consuming fewer foods 
with added sugars, sugar-containing beverages and foods with refined 
grains, while opting for carbohydrate sources with sufficient dietary fibre, 
such as vegetables, fruit, whole grain foods and legumes. With carbo-  
hydrate restriction one’s carbohydrate intake may namely lead to a 
decreased intake of dietary fibre. A diet low in dietary fibre is associated 
with a higher risk of chronic diseases, such as colon cancer, coronary 
heart disease and stroke.54 
Secondly, the Committee recommends choosing good quality sources of 
protein and fat, such as fish, legumes, nuts and vegetable oils, as people 
on a carbohydrate-restricted diet will tend to eat relatively more fat and/or 
protein instead of carbohydrates. One concern, therefore, is that they may 
increase the intake of animal-based foods and saturated fat. In the short 
term, an increase in saturated fat intake can result in an increase in, 
among other things, LDL cholesterol, which increases the risk of coronary 
heart disease in the long term.55 In its evaluation of carbohydrate-
restricted dietary patterns, the Committee found heterogeneous effects on 
LDL cholesterol (favourable, neutral and unfavourable effects), which were 
probably caused, among other things, by differences in the macronutrients 
used to replace carbohydrates. It is known from studies in the general 
population that substituting carbohydrates with saturated fats increases 
LDL cholesterol while substituting them with unsaturated fats lowers LDL 
cholesterol.56 Cohort studies in people with type 2 diabetes show that 
substituting carbohydrates with saturated fats is associated with a higher 
risk of cardiovascular disease (see Background document Carbohydrate 
and fat substitutions).57 
234 36

chapter 04 | Carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern 


Complete diet
It is important to consume a complete diet in order to prevent nutrient 
deficiencies. International intervention studies show that intakes of vitamin 
B1, folate, magnesium, calcium, iron, and iodine decreased in people who 
followed a carbohydrate-restricted diet for two weeks up to two years.58 It 
is unknown whether a dietary pattern with a low or moderate quantity of 
carbohydrates will lead to certain micronutrient deficiencies (nutritional 
intake or nutritional status) in the Netherlands. This is not an easy  
question to answer, as carbohydrate-restricted dietary patterns can take 
many forms. Therefore, the Committee recommends calculating micro-  
nutrient intake when individual dietary advice is given on a carbohydrate-
restricted dietary pattern, with a special focus on micronutrients from 
carbohydrate sources, such as iodine and vitamin B1.
Adjustment of diabetes medication
In general, with the use of medication that can lead to hypoglycaemia 
(such as sulphonylurea derivatives and insulin), the use of this medication 
should be adjusted to the amount of carbohydrates that are being 
consumed. Furthermore, people with type 2 diabetes who are prescribed 
SGLT-2 inhibitors, a relatively new class of blood glucose lowering drugs, 
warrant special attention. These people run a small risk of developing 
ketoacidosis with normal blood glucose levels (euglycaemia) if they use 
these drugs. Ketoacidosis is a metabolic state in which the body produces 
high levels of blood acids called ketones. This is a dangerous state and 
may prompt certain bodily functions to fail. Using SGLT-2 inhibitors while 
on a very low-carbohydrate diet (ketogenic diet) may increase the risk of 
ketoacidosis, as this diet stimulates ketone production.59 Although the 
chance of this happening is probably small, the Committee recommends 
exercising caution with this combination.
235 37

chapter 04 | Carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern 


05 
recommendations
236 38

chapter 05 | Recommendations 


5.1 Dietary recommendations
The Committee has the following recommendations that are applicable to 
people with type 2 diabetes: 
1. In the case of overweight and/or obesity, aim for at least 5% weight 
reduction and maintain this in the long term. 
2. The Dutch dietary guidelines are a suitable basis for a healthy and 
varied dietary pattern for people with type 2 diabetes. The Dutch dietary 
guidelines are set out in the box below.
3. A carbohydrate-restricted dietary pattern may help achieve short-term 
weight reduction and improve glucose metabolism in people with type 2 
diabetes who are overweight or obese, but it is not recommended to 
improve long-term health. This dietary pattern is also not discouraged 
for people with type 2 diabetes who are overweight or obese and aim to 
reduce their energy intake. Guidance from a dietician is preferable.
Dutch dietary guidelines 2015
Follow a dietary pattern that involves eating more plant-based and less  
animal-based food, as recommended in the guidelines: 
• Eat at least 200 grams of vegetables and at least 200 grams of fruit daily
• Eat at least 90 grams of brown bread, wholemeal bread or other whole-grain 
products daily
• Eat legumes weekly
• Eat at least 15 grams of unsalted nuts daily
• Take a few portions of dairy products daily, including milk or yogurt. 
• Eat fish weekly, preferably oily fish
• Drink three cups of tea daily
• Replace refined cereal products by whole-grain products.
• Replace butter, hard margarines, and cooking fats by soft margarines, liquid 
cooking fats, and vegetable oils. 
• Replace unfiltered coffee by filtered coffee 
• Limit the consumption of red meat, particularly processed meat.
• Minimise consumption of sugar-containing beverages.
• Don’t drink alcohol or no more than one glass daily.
• Limit salt intake to 6 grams daily.
• Nutrient supplementsa are not needed, except for specific groups for which 
supplementation appliesb. 
a The guideline on nutrient supplements concerns (multi)vitamins and minerals; 
b For example, vitamin D supplements are recommended for various groups of people, such as 0 to 4-year-olds, 
women aged 50 and over, and everyone aged 70 and over. 
2237 39

chapter 05 | Recommendations 


5.2 Points of interest for professionals in implementing 
the recommendations 
Below, the Committee outlines several points of interest for professionals 
who wish to incorporate its recommendations in nutritional information and 
nutritional care for people with type 2 diabetes.
5.2.1 Part of a multifactorial approach
The treatment of type 2 diabetes is multifactorial and promoting a healthy 
lifestyle is a major component of this multifactorial treatment. In addition to 
eating a healthy diet, a healthy lifestyle also includes getting plenty of 
exercise and not smoking, for example.3 The Committee’s  
recommendations should be incorporated into multifactorial treatment 
plans. Furthermore, the strive for weight loss in overweight and obese 
people with type 2 diabetes should be applied in a broad context of  
interventions aimed at weight reduction and weight maintenance31,35-37, 
with the Committee’s recommendations serving as a basis for dietary 
interventions. 
5.2.2 The importance of a healthy, complete diet
In order to compile a healthy, complete diet, dietary recommendations 
from this advisory report should be combined with dietary reference 
values for nutrients and energy when these are translated to specific 
dietary advices for consumers. The Netherlands Nutrition Centre is 
responsible for disseminating information about healthy dietary patterns 
for the general population. To this end, the Netherlands Nutrition Centre 
has incorporated both dietary guidelines and dietary reference values 
established by the Dutch Health Council in its recommendations for a 
healthy, complete diet (the so-called ‘Wheel of Five’), that matches the 
dietary habits of the Dutch population as much as possible. For people 
with chronic diseases, such as type 2 diabetes, the ‘Wheel of Five’ can 
also serve as a basis for a healthy and complete diet. 
Dieticians, in cooperation with other healthcare professionals, can provide 
tailored dietary advice, for example on food quantities. In giving this 
advice, they can make use of the dietary guidelines and dietary reference 
values, and personal factors such as medication use and one’s preferred 
body weight can be taken into account. 
Dietary reference values are usually (but not exclusively) based on data 
obtained from healthy people. These reference values are generally also 
used for people with chronic diseases, unless professional associations 
have issued deviating recommendations. Based on its expertise, the 
Committee sees no objection to applying existing dietary reference values 
to people with type 2 diabetes. However, it cannot rule out that people with 
type 2 diabetes may, for some nutrients, have different requirements than 
healthy people.
238 40

chapter 05 | Recommendations 


As with the general population, it is preferable for people with type 2 
diabetes to obtain all necessary nutrients through their diet, without taking 
dietary supplements. If this proves impossible, the treatment team may 
opt to test an individual’s personal nutrient levels and advise them to take 
the necessary supplements.
5.2.3 Points of interest with regard to weight
The Committee recommends weight reduction for people with type 2 
diabetes who are overweight or obese. Children and the elderly require 
special attention when attempting to lose weight. In children, growth must 
be taken into account. In the elderly, the consensus is that weight  
reduction should only be considered in cases of obesity, partly because 
there is also loss of bone and muscle mass during weight loss.38
When people aim to maintain their body weight or limit weight gain, it can 
be useful to pay attention to choices within the food groups on which the 
Committee advises. Full-fat dairy products contain more calories than 
semi-skimmed and skimmed dairy products, which may be a reason to opt 
for skimmed or semi-skimmed dairy products. Fresh fruit generally 
contains fewer sugars and therefore fewer calories than canned or jarred 
fruit with added syrup. Tea and filtered coffee without sugar as well as 
water are good alternatives to sugar-containing beverages in the context 
of the energy balance. The Dutch dietary guidelines recommend a 
minimum intake of nuts (i.e. no upper threshold). The Committee wishes 
to stress that nuts are relatively energy-dense foods and cannot be eaten 
in unrestricted amounts. 
5.2.4 Points to consider with carbohydrate-restricted dietary 
patterns
For people with a preference for carbohydrate restriction, it is important to 
pay attention to the quality of the diet to promote long-term health.  
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Dutch dietary guidelines 
are taken into account in the compilation of the carbohydrate-restricted 
dietary pattern. These can provide valuable assistance in choosing high-
quality dietary sources of carbohydrates, such as vegetables, fruit and 
whole grain foods, and good-quality sources of fats and proteins.  
Carbohydrates should be limited mainly by reducing the intake of  
low-fibre, carbohydrate-rich foods, such as sugar-containing beverages 
and refined grain products. Cutting down on these foods is part of the 
Dutch dietary guidelines and is recommended for all people, including 
those with type 2 diabetes. It is important to ensure that the diet, whether 
carbohydrate-restricted or not, contains sufficient quantities of important 
nutrients, such as dietary fibre, vitamins and minerals. Therefore, the 
guidance of a dietician is preferable. 
It is also important to adjust any diabetes medication to the amount of 
carbohydrates consumed in order to prevent hypoglycaemia.
239 41

chapter 05 | Recommendations 


5.3 Dietary recommendations for people with pre-diabetes
The current advisory report concerns people who have type 2 diabetes, 
and studies on people with pre-diabetes have not been evaluated for this 
report. Pre-diabetes is a preliminary stage of type 2 diabetes that involves 
impaired fasting glucose and/or impaired glucose tolerance. This means 
that blood glucose levels are elevated (in the fasting state and/or after a 
glucose tolerance test), but not yet as high as in people with type 2 
diabetes. People with pre-diabetes have a high chance of developing type 
2 diabetes. Approximately 30% of the general population aged 60 and 
over have impaired fasting glucose or impaired glucose tolerance.3 
Several RCTs in people with pre-diabetes show that lifestyle interventions, 
that include targeting adaptations in dietary intake, can be very effective in 
this group. The studies showed that significantly fewer people in the life-
style intervention groups developed diabetes and diabetes complications, 
even in the very long term (up to 20 years).60-62 Based on this, the 
Committee concludes that there are relatively large health gains to be 
made in this group.
The Committee is of the opinion that there is no reason to deviate from the 
Dutch dietary guidelines for people with pre-diabetes. Firstly, because 
people with pre-diabetes, as they are part of the general population, are 
already included in the studies evaluated for the Dutch dietary guidelines. 
Secondly, because the dietary components of the mentioned lifestyle 
interventions were generally in line with the principles of the Dutch dietary 
guidelines.60-62 
5.4 Recommendations for follow-up research 
Based on its evaluation, the Committee makes a number of suggestions 
for follow-up research that may help to further specify and justify dietary 
recommendations for people with type 2 diabetes.
5.4.1 General foundation
For several guidelines of the Dutch dietary guidelines, the Committee 
found insufficient research to come to a conclusion, such as the guidelines 
for dairy products and sugar-containing beverages. The Committee is of 
the opinion that the existing guidelines are, for the time being, a good 
basis for people with type 2 diabetes. However, further research 
confirming (or disproving) this opinion is desirable. A future update  
of the Dutch dietary guidelines for the general population may also  
re-evaluate whether there are scientific reasons for adapting existing  
recommendations. At that time, the consequences of this update for the 
recommendations for people with type 2 diabetes can be re-evaluated.
5.4.2 Long-term effects
In its evaluation of carbohydrate-restricted dietary patterns, the Committee 
noted the studies showed there are no differences when comparing carbo-
hydrate restriction for 12 months to other dietary patterns. There are 
240 42

chapter 05 | Recommendations 


hardly any studies on the health effects over a period longer than one 
year. Participants also appeared to have difficulties in adhering to the 
dietary patterns studied in the long term. Research that can provide 
insight into how people with type 2 diabetes can adhere to a carbo-  
hydrate-restricted dietary pattern for an extended period of time in a 
healthy and complete way would be valuable. The effects on long-term 
health should also be taken into account.
5.4.3 Specific health outcomes
The studies evaluated by the Committee focused mainly on the  
relationship between dietary factors and the health outcomes ‘all-cause 
mortality’ and the ‘development of cardiovascular disease’, or on  
surrogate outcomes such as HbA1c. To the Committee’s knowledge, little 
or no research has been done on the selected dietary factors in relation  
to other complications of diabetes, such as chronic kidney damage, 
neuropathy, retinopathy or infections. The Committee considers it  
important that more research is done into the relationship between dietary 
quality and the occurrence and course of these health outcomes in people 
with type 2 diabetes. 
5.4.4 Specific groups
In this advisory report, the Committee concludes that the Dutch dietary 
guidelines are a suitable basis for the dietary pattern of all people with 
type 2 diabetes. Based on personal characteristics, there could be groups 
of people for whom specific adjustments to these guidelines could be 
recommended to further promote their health.53,63 The Committee also 
investigated whether results in the reviewed studies are consistent in 
specific groups of people classified by gender, age or medication use, for 
example. However, there is currently too little research to make any  
statements on this.
5.4.5 Remission
Several studies indicate that type 2 diabetes could be reversed (diabetes 
remission) with dietary interventions in some people with type 2 
diabetes,34,64,65 possibly through weight loss.34 However, based on the 
current state of scientific knowledge, the Committee could not draw any 
conclusions on the effects of the Dutch dietary guidelines and/or carbo-  
hydrate restriction, and their added value within a multifactorial lifestyle 
intervention, on diabetes remission. Further research is required.
5.4.6 Combined lifestyle interventions
A lot of research has already been done on the effects of combined  
lifestyle interventions, with the dietary components based on tailored 
general guidelines for a healthy diet, in people with pre-diabetes and/or 
overweight or obesity.60-62,66-70 In such interventions, people get advice on 
and guidance with sustained healthy eating and physical activity. In some 
interventions, attention is also paid to sleep and stress. Several studies 
241 43

chapter 05 | Recommendations 


show that long-term (up to 20 years) health gains can be achieved with 
combined lifestyle interventions in people with pre-diabetes.60-62
Combined lifestyle interventions for people who already have type 2 
diabetes are becoming an increasingly popular research topic.34,71,72  
These studies generally report on shorter term health effects (not beyond 
2 years). Research into the long-term effects of combined lifestyle  
interventions in people with type 2 diabetes, the dietary components of 
which are based on the Dutch dietary guidelines, is desirable, such as on 
weight maintenance and weight fluctuations. Research into how these 
interventions can be sustained in the long term is also desirable. 
242 44

chapter 05 | Recommendations